[docs] blue-green deploys with pinned schemas (#2850)
apollographql/federation: docs/source/managed-federation/deployment.mdx

    ```graphql
    ## Publish multiple subgraphs together in a batch
    ## and retrieve the associated launch, along with any downstream launches synchronously.
    mutation PublishSubgraphsMutation(
      $graphId: ID!
      $graphVariant: String!
      $revision: String!
      $subgraphInputs: [PublishSubgraphsSubgraphInput!]!
    ) {
      graph(id: $graphId) {
        publishSubgraphs( #highlight-line
          graphVariant: $graphVariant
          revision: $revision
          subgraphInputs: $subgraphInputs
          downstreamLaunchInitiation: "SYNC"
        ) {
          launch {
            id
            downstreamLaunches {
              id
              graphVariant
              status
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
    ```

  This initiates a [launch](/graphos/delivery/launches/), as well as any downstream launches necessary for [contracts](graphos/delivery/contracts/#automatic-updates). It returns the launch IDs, with downstream launch IDs configured to return synchronously (`downstreamLaunchInitiation: "SYNC"`) with the mutation.

  <Note>

>   For contracts, the contract variants are gotten from this query with ` Launch.graphVariant / downstreamLaunches { graphVariant }`. These are used in queries in following steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  For contracts, you can also request that any downstream launches return the variant associated with each launch,  e.g. `downstreamLaunches { graphVariant }`.  When querying for a specific launch, be sure to pass the variant associated with the launch in the following steps.
```

  </Note>

1. Poll for the completed launch and any downstream launches. 

    ```graphql
    ## Poll for the status of any individual launch by ID
    query PollLaunchStatusQuery($graphId: ID!, $graphVariant: String!, $launchId: ID!) {
      graph(id: $graphId) {
        variant(name: $graphVariant) {
          launch(id: $launchId) {
            status
          }
        }
      }
    }

    ```

    <Note>

>     When polling for a contract, the `$graphVariant` argument of this query must refer to a contract variant. You can get it from the query in step 1, from `Launch.graphVariant / downstreamLaunches { graphVariant }`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    When polling for a contract, the `$graphVariant` argument of this query must refer to the contract variant rather than the base variant. You can get it from the query in step 1, from `Launch.graphVariant / downstreamLaunches { graphVariant }`.
```

Specifically, for deployments that run in different production environments, such as blue-green deployments, you can configure your environments to refer to a single graph variant by pinning each environment's supergraph schema to your routers at deployment time. Using a single variant between different production environments enables Studio to get usage reports and analyze the combined production traffic of all environments.

### Example blue-green deployment

<PreviewFeature />

A blue-green deployment strategy uses two environments: one environment (blue) serves the schema variant for live traffic, and the other environment (green) uses a variant for a new release that's under development. When the new release is ready, traffic is migrated from the blue to the green environment. This cycle repeats with each new release.  

As an example, follow these steps to deploy with a supergraph schema of a new release (green) environment:

> 1. Publish all the release's subgraphs at once using the Platform API [`publishSubgraphs` mutation](https://studio.apollographql.com/graph/apollo-platform/variant/main/schema/reference/objects/GraphMutation#publishSubgraphs).

Reviewer: I wonder if we need to introduce the platform API a little bit here as the link you have currently jumps straight into the weeds.

    ```graphql
    ## Publish multiple subgraphs together in a batch
    ## and retrieve the associated launch, along with any downstream launches synchronously.
    mutation PublishSubgraphsMutation(
      $graphId: ID!
      $graphVariant: String!
      $revision: String!
      $subgraphInputs: [PublishSubgraphsSubgraphInput!]!
    ) {
      graph(id: $graphId) {
        publishSubgraphs( #highlight-line
          graphVariant: $graphVariant
          revision: $revision
          subgraphInputs: $subgraphInputs
          downstreamLaunchInitiation: "SYNC"
        ) {
          launch {
            id
            downstreamLaunches {

>               id

Reviewer: We need to suggest that they include the `graphVariant` here since they'll need to use _this_ `graphVariant` as the input to the next 2 queries (as opposed to the base variant passed in this query)

```suggestion
              id
              graphVariant
              status
```

            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
    ```

  This initiates a [launch](/graphos/delivery/launches/), as well as any downstream launches necessary for [contracts](graphos/delivery/contracts/#automatic-updates). It returns the launch IDs, with downstream launch IDs configured to return synchronously (`downstreamLaunchInitiation: "SYNC"`) with the mutation.

> 1. Poll for the completed launch and any downstream launches. 

Reviewer: We should mention that when using contracts, the `graphVariant` used in this query needs to refer to the contract variant, which can be obtained in the previous query from `Launch.graphVariant / downstreamLaunches { graphVariant }`

    ```graphql
    ## Poll for the status of any individual launch by ID
    query PollLaunchStatusQuery($graphId: ID!, $graphVariant: String!, $launchId: ID!) {
      graph(id: $graphId) {
        variant(name: $graphVariant) {
          launch(id: $launchId) {
            status
          }
        }
      }
    }

    ```

> 1. After the launch and downstream launches have completed, retrieve the supergraph schema of the launch.

Reviewer: We should again mention that when using contracts, the `graphVariant` used in this query needs to refer to the contract variant, which can be obtained in the previous query from `Launch.graphVariant / downstreamLaunches { graphVariant }`

### Example blue-green deployment

A blue-green deployment strategy uses two environments: one environment (blue) serves the schema variant for live traffic, while the other environment (green) uses a variant for a new release that's under development. When the new release is ready, traffic is migrated from the blue to the green environment. This cycle repeats with each new release.  

As an example, follow these steps to deploy with a supergraph schema of a new release (green) environment:

1. Publish all subgraphs of a release at once by using the Platform API [`publishSubgraphs`](https://studio.apollographql.com/graph/apollo-platform/variant/main/schema/reference/objects/GraphMutation#publishSubgraphs).

    ```graphql
    ## Publish multiple subgraphs together in a batch
    ## and retrieve the associated launch, along with any downstream launches.
    mutation PublishSubgraphsMutation(
      $graphId: ID!
      $graphVariant: String!
      $revision: String!
      $subgraphInputs: [PublishSubgraphsSubgraphInput!]!
    ) {
      graph(id: $graphId) {
        publishSubgraphs( #highlight-line

>           graphVariant: $graphVariant

Reviewer 2: Wanted to call out that the variant input argument is called `name` in the other queries below. Not sure if for consistency we want to use one or the other.

Author: This would need to be changed in the [publishSubgraphs](https://studio.apollographql.com/graph/apollo-platform/variant/main/schema/reference/objects/GraphMutation?_gl=1%2A1tgb7vy%2A_ga%2AOTA0MTI5NDAyLjE2OTk2NTcyMzg.%2A_ga_0BGG5V2W2K%2AMTY5OTkwNTY3Mi4yLjAuMTY5OTkwNTY3Mi4wLjAuMA..#publishSubgraphs) API itself?

Reviewer 2: Not necessarily the API can stay the same but we can change the variable names so that they can be shared between all three operations.

For example:

Variables

```json
{
  "graphId" :"my-graph",
  "graphVariant": "current"
}
```

And the operations would all use `$graphVariant` instead of `$name`

PublishSubgraphsMutation would stay as you have it

```graphql
 query PollLaunchStatusQuery($graphId: ID!, $graphVariant: String!, $launchId: ID!) {
      graph(id: $graphId) {
        variant(name: $graphVariant) {
 ...
```

```graphql
query FetchSupergraphSDLQuery($graphId: ID!, $graphVariant: String!, $launchId: String!) {
      graph(id: $graphId) {
        variant(name: $graphVariant) {
...
```

Reviewer 2: I noticed in the current state of the docs `FetchSupergraphSDLQuery` is missing the `$name`/`$graphVariant` argument in the `query`

Reviewer: IMO we should use `graphVariant` instead of `name` 👍

          revision: $revision
          subgraphInputs: $subgraphInputs
        ) {
          launch {
            id

>             downstreamLaunches {

Reviewer 2: Since this example requests information about downstream launches we should recommend users to add as an input argument `downstreamLaunchInitiation = SYNC` ([schema docs](https://studio.apollographql.com/graph/apollo-platform/variant/main/schema/reference/enums/DownstreamLaunchInitiation#SYNC)) as part of the mutation. Otherwise these wont be created within the same request and show up as an empty list.

Reviewer 2: Given that contracts are an enterprise only feature, do we want to have a query that doesn't request downstream launches? Maybe have a separate section for querying downstream launches which shows the example with the above mentioned input argument. 

It might be confusing that the initial recommended example will have unexpected response for non-enterprise users.

Reviewer 2: Ah but maybe since this is under the "managed federation" section of the docs its completely fine.

Author: Great point, will separate this as you suggest

## Using variants to control rollout

> Your deployment model may require deploying a specific version of your graph, for example for blue-green deployments or canary deployments. With managed federation, you can control which version of your graph a fleet of routers are using. In the majority of cases, rolling over all of your router instances to a new schema version is safe, assuming you've used [schema checks](./federated-schema-checks/) to confirm that your changes are backward compatible.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Your deployment model may require deploying a specific version of your graph, for example, for blue-green or canary deployments. With managed federation, you can control which version of your graph your router fleet uses. In most cases, rolling over all of your router instances to a new schema version is safe, assuming you've used [schema checks](./federated-schema-checks/) to confirm that your changes are backward compatible.
```

> However, changes at the router level might involve a variety of different updates, such as [migrating entities](../entities-advanced/#migrating-entities-and-fields) from one subgraph to another. If your infrastructure requires a more advanced deployment process, you can use [graph variants](/graphos/graphs/#variants) to manage different fleets of routers running with different configurations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, changes at the router level might involve a variety of different updates, such as [migrating entities](../entities-advanced/#migrating-entities-and-fields) from one subgraph to another. If your infrastructure requires a more advanced deployment process, you can use [graph variants](/graphos/graphs/#variants) to manage router fleets running with different configurations.
```

> Specifically, for deployments that run in different production environments, such as blue-green deployments, you can configure your environments to refer to a single graph variant by pinning the supergraph schema of each environment to your routers at deployment time. Using a single variant between different production environments enables Studio to get usage reports and do analysis on the combined production traffic of all environments.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Specifically, for deployments that run in different production environments, such as blue-green deployments, you can configure your environments to refer to a single graph variant by pinning each environment's supergraph schema to your routers at deployment time. Using a single variant between different production environments enables Studio to get usage reports and analyze the combined production traffic of all environments.
```

### Example blue-green deployment

> A blue-green deployment strategy uses two environments: one environment (blue) serves the schema variant for live traffic, while the other environment (green) uses a variant for a new release that's under development. When the new release is ready, traffic is migrated from the blue to the green environment. This cycle repeats with each new release.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A blue-green deployment strategy uses two environments: one environment (blue) serves the schema variant for live traffic. The other environment (green) uses a variant for a new release that's under development. When the new release is ready, traffic is migrated from the blue to the green environment. This cycle repeats with each new release.  
```

> As an example, follow these steps to deploy with a supergraph schema of a new release (green) environment:

Reviewer 3: Is some portion of this technically in preview vs. GA? If so, let's call it out.

> 1. Publish all subgraphs of a release at once by using the Platform API [`publishSubgraphs`](https://studio.apollographql.com/graph/apollo-platform/variant/main/schema/reference/objects/GraphMutation#publishSubgraphs).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Publish all the release's subgraphs at once using the Platform API [`publishSubgraphs` mutation](https://studio.apollographql.com/graph/apollo-platform/variant/main/schema/reference/objects/GraphMutation#publishSubgraphs).
```

This link redirects to https://studio.apollographql.com/public/apollo-platform/variant/main/home for me. Is that expected?

Author: That's unexpected. For me in a Chrome Incognito window the link opens up the Studio login page, after which it goes to the expected platform API doc.

Reviewer 3: Huh, yeah. It works incognito for me, but in a browser where I'm already signed in: https://www.loom.com/share/e55bc203a82a470084bf9d05457893b5

    ```graphql
    ## Publish multiple subgraphs together in a batch
    ## and retrieve the associated launch, along with any downstream launches synchronously.
    mutation PublishSubgraphsMutation(
      $graphId: ID!
      $graphVariant: String!
      $revision: String!
      $subgraphInputs: [PublishSubgraphsSubgraphInput!]!
    ) {
      graph(id: $graphId) {
        publishSubgraphs( #highlight-line
          graphVariant: $graphVariant
          revision: $revision
          subgraphInputs: $subgraphInputs
          downstreamLaunchInitiation: "SYNC"
        ) {
          launch {
            id
            downstreamLaunches {
              id
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
    ```

>   This initiates a launch, as well as any downstream launches necessary for [contracts](graphos/delivery/contracts/#automatic-updates). It returns the launch IDs, with downstream launch IDs configured to return synchronously (`downstreamLaunchInitiation: "SYNC"`) with the mutation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  This initiates a [launch](/graphos/delivery/launches/), as well as any downstream launches necessary for [contracts](graphos/delivery/contracts/#automatic-updates). It returns the launch IDs, with downstream launch IDs configured to return synchronously (`downstreamLaunchInitiation: "SYNC"`) with the mutation.
```

However, changes at the router level might involve a variety of different updates, such as [migrating entities](../entities-advanced/#migrating-entities-and-fields) from one subgraph to another. If your infrastructure requires a more advanced deployment process, you can use [graph variants](/graphos/graphs/#variants) to manage router fleets running with different configurations.

Specifically, for deployments that run in different production environments, such as blue-green deployments, you can configure your environments to refer to a single graph variant by pinning each environment's supergraph schema to your routers at deployment time. Using a single variant between different production environments enables Studio to get usage reports and analyze the combined production traffic of all environments.

> ### Example blue-green deployment

Reviewer 2: Do you think we should add a diagram to showcase this workflow more visually? It seems like a nice to have so not a blocker for this PR merging

Author: Good suggestion, adding it as a follow-up task

> <PreviewFeature />

Reviewer 2: I noticed this component has the following statement:
> get in touch with your Apollo contact or on the official[ Apollo GraphQL Discord](https://discord.gg/yFZJH2QYrK).

We should give a heads up to the Discord admins when this PR merges

1. Poll for the completed launch and any downstream launches. 

    ```graphql
    ## Poll for the status of any individual launch by ID
    query PollLaunchStatusQuery($graphId: ID!, $graphVariant: String!, $launchId: ID!) {
      graph(id: $graphId) {
        variant(name: $graphVariant) {
          launch(id: $launchId) {
            status
          }
        }
      }
    }

    ```

1. After the launch and downstream launches have completed, retrieve the supergraph schema of the launch.

    ```graphql
    ## Fetch the supergraph SDL by launch ID.
    query FetchSupergraphSDLQuery($graphId: ID!, $graphVariant: String!, $launchId: String!) {
      graph(id: $graphId) {
        variant(name: $graphVariant) {
          launch(id: $launchId) {
            build {
              result {
                ... on BuildSuccess {
                  coreSchema {
                    coreDocument
                  }
                }
              }
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }

    ```

> 1. Deploy your routers with the [`-s` or `--supergraph` option](/router/configuration/overview/#-s----supergraph) to specify the supergraph schema.

Reviewer 2: It wasn't clear to me that when providing this parameter the router won't poll uplink for the schema. Do you know if we call that out anywhere?

Author: Good catch, adding a note here, and will update router docs too in its configuration section
